# Error Handling

## General conventions

At the moment, the Elixir community has come to some conventions regarding returning errors:

* For errors that are part of the regular operation of a function (e.g. a user entered a wrong type of date), a function returns `{:ok, result}` and `{:error, reason}` accordingly.
* For errors that are not part of normal operations (e.g. being unable to parse configuration data) you throw an exception.

We generally handle standard flow errors by [Pattern Matching](/en/lessons/basics/pattern_matching), but in this lesson, we are focusing on the second case - on the exceptions.

Often, in public APIs, you can also find a second version of the function with a ! (example!/1) that returns the unwrapped result or raises an error.

## Error Handling

Before we can handle errors we need to create them and the simplest way to do so is with `raise/1`:


```elixir
 raise "Oh no!"
```

If we want to specify the type and message, we need to use `raise/2`:


```elixir
 raise ArgumentError, message: "the argument value is invalid"
```

When we know an error may occur, we can handle it using `try/rescue` and pattern matching:


```elixir
 try do
```

It's possible to match multiple errors in a single rescue:


```elixir
try do
  opts
  |> Keyword.fetch!(:source_file)
  |> File.read!()
rescue
  e in KeyError -> IO.puts("missing :source_file option")
  e in File.Error -> IO.puts("unable to read source file")
end
```

## After

At times it may be necessary to perform some action after our `try/rescue` regardless of error.
For this we have `try/after`.
If you're familiar with Ruby this is akin to `begin/rescue/ensure` or in Java `try/catch/finally`:


```elixir
 try do
```

This is most commonly used with files or connections that should be closed:


```elixir
{:ok, file} = File.open("example.json")

try do
  # Do hazardous work
after
  File.close(file)
end
```

## New Errors

While Elixir includes a number of builtin error types like `RuntimeError`, we maintain the ability to create our own if we need something specific.
Creating a new error is easy with the `defexception/1` macro which conveniently accepts the `:message` option to set a default error message:


```elixir
defmodule ExampleError do
  defexception message: "an example error has occurred"
end
```

Let's take our new error for a spin:


```elixir
 try do
```

## Throws

Another mechanism for working with errors in Elixir is `throw` and `catch`.
In practice these occur very infrequently in newer Elixir code but it's important to know and understand them nonetheless.

The `throw/1` function gives us the ability to exit execution with a specific value we can `catch` and use:


```elixir
 try do
```

As mentioned, `throw/catch` are quite uncommon and typically exist as stopgaps when libraries fail to provide adequate APIs.

## Exiting

The final error mechanism Elixir provides us with is `exit`.
Exit signals occur whenever a process dies and are an important part of the fault tolerance of Elixir.

To explicitly exit we can use `exit/1`:


```elixir
 spawn_link fn -> exit("oh no") end
```

While it is possible to catch an exit with `try/catch` doing so is _extremely_ rare.
In almost all cases it is advantageous to let the supervisor handle the process exit:


```elixir
 try do
```
